.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

<!-- Delete each of these instruction comments as you complete it. -->

<!-- Title: use a short, declarative statement similar to a commit message,
     e.g. “Change [thing X] to [fix solve bug|enable feature Y]” -->

**Required:** write a single sentence here describing the changes made by this PR.

<!-- Optional: write a longer description here to help a reviewer understand the PR in 3–5 minutes. -->

## How to review

**Required:** describe specific things that reviewer(s) need to do to, in order
to ensure that the PR does what it intends.

<!-- For example:

- Run a specific code snippet or command and check the output.
- Build the documentation and look at a certain.
- Simply view changes and note that the CI checks all pass.
- Ensure that changes/additions are self-documenting, i.e. that another
  developer like the reviewer will be able to understand what the code does
  in the future.
-->

## PR checklist

<!-- The following items are all **required* if the PR results in changes to
the user behaviour, e.g. new features or fixes to existing behaviour. They are
**optional** if the changes are solely to documentation, CI configuration, etc.

In ambiguous cases, strike them out and add a short explanation, e.g.

- [x] ~Tests added.~ No change in behaviour, simply refactoring.
-->

- [ ] Tests added.
- [ ] Documentation added.
- [ ] Release notes updated.
  <!-- To update `RELEASE_NOTES.rst`, add a single line under the section
  “Next release” similar to:

  - `#999 <https://github.com/iiasa/ixmp/pull/999>`_: Title or single-sentence
    description from above.
  -->

Commit message:

Update GitHub pull request template

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

<!-- Delete each of these instruction comments as you complete it. -->

<!-- Title: use a short, declarative statement similar to a commit message,
     e.g. “Change [thing X] to [fix solve bug|enable feature Y]” -->

**Required:** write a single sentence here describing the changes made by this PR.

<!-- Optional: write a longer description here to help a reviewer understand the PR in 3–5 minutes. -->

## How to review

**Required:** describe specific things that reviewer(s) need to do to, in order
to ensure that the PR does what it intends.

<!-- For example:

- Run a specific code snippet or command and check the output.
- Build the documentation and look at a certain page.
- Simply view changes and note that the CI checks all pass.
- Ensure that changes/additions are self-documenting, i.e. that another
  developer like the reviewer will be able to understand what the code does
  in the future.
-->

## PR checklist

<!-- The following items are all **required* if the PR results in changes to
the user behaviour, e.g. new features or fixes to existing behaviour. They are
**optional** if the changes are solely to documentation, CI configuration, etc.

In ambiguous cases, strike them out and add a short explanation, e.g.

- [x] ~Tests added.~ No change in behaviour, simply refactoring.
-->

- [ ] Tests added.
- [ ] Documentation added.
- [ ] Release notes updated.
  <!-- Add a single line at the top of the “Next release” section of
       RELEASE_NOTES.rst, where '999' is the GitHub pull request number:

    - :pull:`999`: Title or single-sentence description from above.
  -->
