NOTICE.rst, before:

User Guidelines and Notice
==========================

   Copyright 2017-18 IIASA Energy Program

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.


Introduction
------------

This document specifies the guidelines for using the |MESSAGEix| framework and the ix modeling platform.
The aim of these guidelines is to ensure best scientific practice and collaborative development of the platform.

Documentation and further information is available at http://ene.software.iiasa.ac.at/ixmp/.
The framework is available for download at http://github.com/iiasa/ixmp.
Please refer to the website and repository for the most up-to-date version of the code base.

The community mailing list for questions and discussions on new features is hosted using Googlegroups.
Please join at `groups.google.com/d/forum/message_ix`_
and use <message_ix@googlegroups.com> to send an email to the MESSAGEix and ixmp user community.

.. _`groups.google.com/d/forum/message_ix` : https://groups.google.com/d/forum/message_ix


User Guidelines
---------------

A) Reference to the scientific publication and online resources
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please cite the following manuscript when using the |MESSAGEix| framework and/or the ix modeling platform 
for scientific publications or technical reports:

  Daniel Huppmann, Matthew Gidden, Oliver Fricko, Peter Kolp, 
  Clara Orthofer, Michael Pimmer, Keywan Riahi, and Volker Krey. 
  "The MESSAGEix Integrated Assessment Model and the ix modeling platform". 
  Electronic pre-print available at `pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/`_.

Also, please include a hyperlink to the online resource `MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at`_
in any publication/report, or on a website describing your model
or scientific analysis using the MESSAGEix framework.

.. _`pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/` : https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/

.. _`MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at` : http://MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at

B) Developing new model instances
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Researchers are welcome to develop new model instances using the |MESSAGEix| framework 
for their own research interests. However, any such model must be named "MESSAGEix xxx" or "MESSAGEix-xxx",
where 'xxx' is replaced by the name of the country/region, institutional affiliation or a similar identifying name.
For example, the national model for South Africa developed by Orthofer et al. [1] is called "MESSAGEix South Africa".

Furthermore, please ensure that there is no naming conflict with existing versions of the |MESSAGEix| model family.
When in doubt, please contact the IIASA Energy Program at <message_ix@iiasa.ac.at>.

C) Notice of new publications
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We would appreciate a notice of publications using the |MESSAGEix| framework and the ix modeling platform.
Please send an e-mail to <message_ix@iiasa.ac.at>.


Contributor Guidelines
----------------------

We appreciate contributions to the code base and development of new features for the framework.
Please refer to `CONTRIBUTING.rst`_ for details.

.. _`CONTRIBUTING.rst` : CONTRIBUTING.rst


References
----------

[1] Clara Orthofer, Daniel Huppmann, and Volker Krey. "South Africa's shale gas resources - chance or challenge?"
2018, submitted. Electronic pre-print available at `pure.iiasa.ac.at/15085/`_.

.. _`pure.iiasa.ac.at/15085/` : https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/15085/

Commit message:

MESSAGEix manuscript reference update (#107)
* update references to MESSAGEix manuscript in readme's and documentation

* update reference to MESSAGEix South Africa manuscript

* formatting update in README

* escaping `&` in LaTeX bib file

NOTICE.rst, after:

User Guidelines and Notice
==========================

   Copyright 2017-18 IIASA Energy Program

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.


Introduction
------------

This document specifies the guidelines for using the |MESSAGEix| framework and the ix modeling platform.
The aim of these guidelines is to ensure best scientific practice and collaborative development of the platform.

Documentation and further information is available at http://ene.software.iiasa.ac.at/ixmp/.
The framework is available for download at http://github.com/iiasa/ixmp.
Please refer to the website and repository for the most up-to-date version of the code base.

The community mailing list for questions and discussions on new features is hosted using Googlegroups.
Please join at `groups.google.com/d/forum/message_ix`_
and use <message_ix@googlegroups.com> to send an email to the MESSAGEix and ixmp user community.

.. _`groups.google.com/d/forum/message_ix` : https://groups.google.com/d/forum/message_ix


User Guidelines
---------------

A) Reference to the scientific publication and online resources
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please cite the following manuscript when using the |MESSAGEix| framework and/or
the ix modeling platform  for scientific publications or technical reports:

  Daniel Huppmann, Matthew Gidden, Oliver Fricko, Peter Kolp, Clara Orthofer,
  Michael Pimmer, Nikolay Kushin, Adriano Vinca, Alessio Mastrucci,
  Keywan Riahi, and Volker Krey.
  "The MESSAGEix Integrated Assessment Model and the ix modeling platform".
  *Environmental Modelling & Software* 112:143-156, 2019. 
  doi: `10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.11.012`_
  electronic pre-print available at `pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/`_.

Also, please include a hyperlink to the online resource `MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at`_
in any publication/report, or on a website describing your model
or scientific analysis using the MESSAGEix framework.

..  _`10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.11.012` : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.11.012

.. _`pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/` : https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/

.. _`MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at` : http://MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at

B) Developing new model instances
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Researchers are welcome to develop new model instances using the |MESSAGEix| framework 
for their own research interests. However, any such model must be named "MESSAGEix xxx" or "MESSAGEix-xxx",
where 'xxx' is replaced by the name of the country/region, institutional affiliation or a similar identifying name.
For example, the national model for South Africa developed by Orthofer et al. [1] is called "MESSAGEix South Africa".

Furthermore, please ensure that there is no naming conflict with existing versions of the |MESSAGEix| model family.
When in doubt, please contact the IIASA Energy Program at <message_ix@iiasa.ac.at>.

C) Notice of new publications
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We would appreciate a notice of publications using the |MESSAGEix| framework and the ix modeling platform.
Please send an e-mail to <message_ix@iiasa.ac.at>.


Contributor Guidelines
----------------------

We appreciate contributions to the code base and development of new features for the framework.
Please refer to `CONTRIBUTING.rst`_ for details.

.. _`CONTRIBUTING.rst` : CONTRIBUTING.rst


References
----------

[1] Clara Orthofer, Daniel Huppmann, and Volker Krey.
"South Africa after Paris - Fracking its Way to the NDCs?"
2018, in review. Electronic pre-print available at `pure.iiasa.ac.at/15085/`_.

.. _`pure.iiasa.ac.at/15085/` : https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/15085/
