README.md, before:

# The ix modeling platform (ixmp)

## Overview

The ix modeling platform (ixmp) is a data warehouse for high-powered scenario analysis,
with interfaces to Python and R for efficient scientific workflows and effective data pre- and post-processing,
and a structured database backend for version-controlled data management.

This repository contains the core and application programming interfaces (API)
for the ix modeling platform (ixmp), as well as a number of tutorials and examples
for a generic model instance based on Dantzig's transport problem.


## License

Copyright 2017-18 IIASA Energy Program

The platform package is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use the files in this repository except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at <http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>.

Please refer to the [NOTICE](NOTICE.rst) for details and the user guidelines.


## Documentation and tutorial

A [documentation the ix modeling platform and the MESSAGEix framework](http://MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at/) 
is automatically created from the documentation of the Python and R API packages. 
The online documentation is synchronyzed with the contents of the master branch 
of the repositories [www.github.com/iiasa/ixmp](http://www.github.com/iiasa/ixmp)
and [www.github.com/iiasa/message_ix](http://www.github.com/iiasa/message_ix).

There are a number of tutorials to get started with ixmp.
You may want to try the [tutorial/transport](tutorial/transport/README.md)...

Follow the instructions in [doc/README](doc/README.md)
for building the ixmp documentation including the
scientific programming API manuals on your local machine.


## Scientific reference

Please cite the following manuscript when using the MESSAGEix framework and/or the ix modeling platform 
for scientific publications or technical reports:

  Daniel Huppmann, Matthew Gidden, Oliver Fricko, Peter Kolp, 
  Clara Orthofer, Michael Pimmer, Adriano Vinca, Alessio Mastrucci, Keywan Riahi, and Volker Krey. 
  "The |MESSAGEix| Integrated Assessment Model and the ix modeling platform". 2018, submitted. 
  Electronic pre-print available at [pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/](https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/).


## Dependency Installation

### TLDR

```bash
# setup python virtual environment
virtualenv --python=python3.6 .env && source .env/bin/activate
# install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
# run tests
python setup.py install && cd tests && python -m pytest .
```

### General

0. Install the Java Development Kit (Java SE 8)
   and set the environment variable `JAVA_HOME` 
   per the [JDK website instructions](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19182-01/820-7851/inst_cli_jdk_javahome_t/); 
   if `JAVA_HOME` does not exist, add as new system variable.
   *At this point, ixmp is not compatible with JAVA SE 9.*
   
0. Update your `PATH` environment variable to point to the JRE binaries and server installation
   (e.g., `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk[YOUR JDK VERSION]\jre\bin\`,
   `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk[YOUR JDK VERSION]\jre\bin\server`).
   
   <aside class="warning">
   Do not overwrite the existing `PATH` environment variable, but add to the list of existing paths.
   </aside>

0. Install the latest version of GAMS, otherwise, the export to GDX may not work
   properly (visit [www.gams.com](http://www.gams.com)).  If you only have a license for an
   older verson of GAMS, install both versions. 
   Note that for using the integrated MESSAGEix-MACRO model, it is important to install a GAMS version >= 24.8.1.

0. Update your `PATH` environment variable to point to the GAMS installation
   (e.g. `C:\GAMS\win64\24.8`); again do not overwrite existing `PATH` but rather add to end.

0. Install some version of Python (2.7 is supported, but 3.6 or higher is recommended).
   [Anaconda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads) is a good choice for
   users not yet familiar with the language (during installation select add anaconda to PATH system variable)

0. Install a Windows C++ Compiler

   - For Python 3: [link](http://landinghub.visualstudio.com/visual-cpp-build-tools)
   - For Python 2: [link](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=44266)

0. Install a version of `git`, (see, e.g., the [website](https://git-scm.com/downloads))

0. In a command prompt, execute the following two lines 
   to install all Python dependencies for running the unit tests
   and building the auto-documentation for the Python interface 
   and the MESSAGEix GAMS code:

    ```
    pip install cython numpy pandas "pytest>=3.0.6" "JPype1>=0.6.2" 
    pip install sphinx sphinxcontrib.bibtex sphinxcontrib-fulltoc numpydoc cloud_sptheme
    ```

### Additional dependencies for R users


0. Install packages `rJava` , `devtools` and `optparse` via the R package manager

0. For working with Jupyter notebooks using R, install the [IRkernel](https://irkernel.github.io)


## Installing the ix modeling platform

0. Fork this repository and clone the forked repository (`<user>/ixmp`)
   to your machine.  To fork the repository, look for the fork button 
   in the top right at [iiasa/ixmp](https://github.com/iiasa/ixmp).
   Add `iiasa/ixmp` as `upstream` to your clone.

   *We recommend* [GitKraken](https://www.gitkraken.com/) *for users who prefer a graphical user 
    interface application to work with Github (as opposed to the command line).*

### Windows Users

0. Double click on `install.bat` in the local folder in which you saved your branch.
   This will also install the *R interface*.

### *nix Users

0. *To install the Python interface* and run the unit tests, execute the following command
   in a command prompt:

   ```
   python setup.py install
   py.test tests
   ```

0. *To install the R interface*, as an additional step , in a command prompt:
   locate in the `ixmp` folder where the file `install.bat` is;
   type:

   ```
   rscript rixmp/build_rixmp.R [--verbose]
   ```

### Connecting to an ixmp database instance

0. To connect to a central database instance, you need a database ``properties`` file
   and place it in the ``ixmp/config`` folder.
   Refer to the ``README.md`` in that folder for details.
   
   **Connecting to a local (file-based) HSQL database instance for testing
   and developing small model instances does not require a ``properties`` file!**


## Notes and Warnings 

0.  For **Anaconda** users, `jpype` may not install correctly using the pip command. 
    So, if ``install.bat`` cannot find `jpype`, use conda to install it by 
    running the following command in a command prompt:  

    ```
    conda install -c conda-forge jpype1
    ```

    To check if it works now, run the following command 
    and you should get the jpype version number ``0.6.2`` (or higher).
	
    ```
    python -c "import jpype; print(jpype.__version__)"
    ```

0. For **Anaconda** users experiencing problems during installation of ixmp,
   Anaconda might not have been added to the PATH system variable properly. 
   So, if ``install.bat`` just opens and collapses again, check if:

    ```
    C:\[YOUR ANACONDA LOCATION]\Anaconda3;
    C:\[YOUR ANACONDA LOCATION]\Anaconda3\Scripts;
    C:\[YOUR ANACONDA LOCATION]\Anaconda3\Library\bin;
    ```   

   are all part of the PATH system variable. If they are not there, add them.

Commit message:

- tiny fix because tests cannot be executed from project root because python chooses ixmp folder over ixmp package from virtualenv - added dylibs for mac

README.md, after:

# The ix modeling platform (ixmp)

## Overview

The ix modeling platform (ixmp) is a data warehouse for high-powered scenario analysis,
with interfaces to Python and R for efficient scientific workflows and effective data pre- and post-processing,
and a structured database backend for version-controlled data management.

This repository contains the core and application programming interfaces (API)
for the ix modeling platform (ixmp), as well as a number of tutorials and examples
for a generic model instance based on Dantzig's transport problem.


## License

Copyright 2017-18 IIASA Energy Program

The platform package is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use the files in this repository except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at <http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>.

Please refer to the [NOTICE](NOTICE.rst) for details and the user guidelines.


## Documentation and tutorial

A [documentation the ix modeling platform and the MESSAGEix framework](http://MESSAGEix.iiasa.ac.at/) 
is automatically created from the documentation of the Python and R API packages. 
The online documentation is synchronyzed with the contents of the master branch 
of the repositories [www.github.com/iiasa/ixmp](http://www.github.com/iiasa/ixmp)
and [www.github.com/iiasa/message_ix](http://www.github.com/iiasa/message_ix).

There are a number of tutorials to get started with ixmp.
You may want to try the [tutorial/transport](tutorial/transport/README.md)...

Follow the instructions in [doc/README](doc/README.md)
for building the ixmp documentation including the
scientific programming API manuals on your local machine.


## Scientific reference

Please cite the following manuscript when using the MESSAGEix framework and/or the ix modeling platform 
for scientific publications or technical reports:

  Daniel Huppmann, Matthew Gidden, Oliver Fricko, Peter Kolp, 
  Clara Orthofer, Michael Pimmer, Adriano Vinca, Alessio Mastrucci, Keywan Riahi, and Volker Krey. 
  "The |MESSAGEix| Integrated Assessment Model and the ix modeling platform". 2018, submitted. 
  Electronic pre-print available at [pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/](https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/15157/).


## Dependency Installation

### TLDR

```bash
# setup python virtual environment
virtualenv --python=python3.6 .env && source .env/bin/activate
# install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
# add GAMS libs folder to PATH
export PATH=$PATH:<path-to-gams-libs>
# install ixmp
python setup.py install
# run tests
pytest tests
```

* On OSX path to GAMS libraries will be `/Applications/GAMS25.0/sysdir` for GAMS 25.0

### General

0. Install the Java Development Kit (Java SE 8)
   and set the environment variable `JAVA_HOME` 
   per the [JDK website instructions](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19182-01/820-7851/inst_cli_jdk_javahome_t/); 
   if `JAVA_HOME` does not exist, add as new system variable.
   *At this point, ixmp is not compatible with JAVA SE 9.*
   
0. Update your `PATH` environment variable to point to the JRE binaries and server installation
   (e.g., `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk[YOUR JDK VERSION]\jre\bin\`,
   `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk[YOUR JDK VERSION]\jre\bin\server`).
   
   <aside class="warning">
   Do not overwrite the existing `PATH` environment variable, but add to the list of existing paths.
   </aside>

0. Install the latest version of GAMS, otherwise, the export to GDX may not work
   properly (visit [www.gams.com](http://www.gams.com)).  If you only have a license for an
   older verson of GAMS, install both versions. 
   Note that for using the integrated MESSAGEix-MACRO model, it is important to install a GAMS version >= 24.8.1.

0. Update your `PATH` environment variable to point to the GAMS installation
   (e.g. `C:\GAMS\win64\24.8`); again do not overwrite existing `PATH` but rather add to end.

0. Install some version of Python (2.7 is supported, but 3.6 or higher is recommended).
   [Anaconda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads) is a good choice for
   users not yet familiar with the language (during installation select add anaconda to PATH system variable)

0. Install a Windows C++ Compiler

   - For Python 3: [link](http://landinghub.visualstudio.com/visual-cpp-build-tools)
   - For Python 2: [link](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=44266)

0. Install a version of `git`, (see, e.g., the [website](https://git-scm.com/downloads))

0. In a command prompt, execute the following two lines 
   to install all Python dependencies for running the unit tests
   and building the auto-documentation for the Python interface 
   and the MESSAGEix GAMS code:

    ```
    pip install cython numpy pandas "pytest>=3.0.6" "JPype1>=0.6.2" 
    pip install sphinx sphinxcontrib.bibtex sphinxcontrib-fulltoc numpydoc cloud_sptheme
    ```

### Additional dependencies for R users


0. Install packages `rJava` , `devtools` and `optparse` via the R package manager

0. For working with Jupyter notebooks using R, install the [IRkernel](https://irkernel.github.io)


## Installing the ix modeling platform

0. Fork this repository and clone the forked repository (`<user>/ixmp`)
   to your machine.  To fork the repository, look for the fork button 
   in the top right at [iiasa/ixmp](https://github.com/iiasa/ixmp).
   Add `iiasa/ixmp` as `upstream` to your clone.

   *We recommend* [GitKraken](https://www.gitkraken.com/) *for users who prefer a graphical user 
    interface application to work with Github (as opposed to the command line).*

### Windows Users

0. Double click on `install.bat` in the local folder in which you saved your branch.
   This will also install the *R interface*.

### *nix Users

0. *To install the Python interface* and run the unit tests, execute the following command
   in a command prompt:

   ```
   python setup.py install
   py.test tests
   ```

0. *To install the R interface*, as an additional step , in a command prompt:
   locate in the `ixmp` folder where the file `install.bat` is;
   type:

   ```
   rscript rixmp/build_rixmp.R [--verbose]
   ```

### Connecting to an ixmp database instance

0. To connect to a central database instance, you need a database ``properties`` file
   and place it in the ``ixmp/config`` folder.
   Refer to the ``README.md`` in that folder for details.
   
   **Connecting to a local (file-based) HSQL database instance for testing
   and developing small model instances does not require a ``properties`` file!**


## Notes and Warnings 

0.  For **Anaconda** users, `jpype` may not install correctly using the pip command. 
    So, if ``install.bat`` cannot find `jpype`, use conda to install it by 
    running the following command in a command prompt:  

    ```
    conda install -c conda-forge jpype1
    ```

    To check if it works now, run the following command 
    and you should get the jpype version number ``0.6.2`` (or higher).
	
    ```
    python -c "import jpype; print(jpype.__version__)"
    ```

0. For **Anaconda** users experiencing problems during installation of ixmp,
   Anaconda might not have been added to the PATH system variable properly. 
   So, if ``install.bat`` just opens and collapses again, check if:

    ```
    C:\[YOUR ANACONDA LOCATION]\Anaconda3;
    C:\[YOUR ANACONDA LOCATION]\Anaconda3\Scripts;
    C:\[YOUR ANACONDA LOCATION]\Anaconda3\Library\bin;
    ```   

   are all part of the PATH system variable. If they are not there, add them.
